---
title: ""
date: 2005-11-20 19:13:00
permalink: 2005/11/response-on-riots-in-france-becker--although-there-is-some-dispute-for-the-us-about-the-magnitude-of-the-effects-of-the-minim.html
---
Response on Riots in France-BECKER

Although there is some dispute for the US about the magnitude of the effects of the minimum wage on the unemployment of low skilled persons, the French results on the effects of its minimum wage are far clearer. The clearer results for France (see the work of Bernard Salanie) are probably because the French minimum has been much higher relative to its average wage than has been the American minimum. Note that higher minimums might raise family income inequality not only because it reduces employment, but also because many of those benefiting from higher wages are teenagers and others in fairly well off families.

For the most part (with one or two exceptions) I avoided attributing causes to the French riots. Instead, I stressed that the French labor market system in effect discriminates against Muslim and other immigrants. I suspect that the low wages, high unemployment, and poor education of African immigrants contributed to the riots there, but at this point we can hardly be confident about that conclusion. 

Let me add that unemployment rates in France and the US are determined in similar ways. It is not true that persons who have been unemployed for more than six months are no longer considered unemployed in American data. They are considered to be unemployed if they do not have jobs and are looking for work.

I do believe there is often anti-competitive behavior by economic and other elites. It usually operates through discriminatory legislation. Many of the labor laws in Europe favor the elites-in this case, the insiders with good jobs- and hurts outsiders who are looking for decent pay and employment.

I do not believe there is anything in Islamic law, and my wife who teaches Islamic history confirms this, that prevents good Muslims from giving allegiance to non-Islamic states. However, when Muslims are segregated into separate suburbs, as in most French cities, it presumably is easier to generate hostility to the ruling authorities, and even support for more radical forms of Islam.

In the US, new immigrants do generally have jobs, even when they are unskilled. Moreover, immigrants can rise over time in the economic ladder more easily here than in Europe. This does not mean there will be no riots by any American immigrant groups, but I believe they are less likely.

<span style="color:#999">Posted at 07:13 PM</span>

<!-- more -->

---

### Comments

---

Economists have damaged a proper discussion of health care issues by the simple-minded application of theory appropriate for discussing consumer goods.  Medical care is not a consumer good.  If we operated with a concept of society and community (which is difficult in a multicultural society), we would see that a healthy society (even including people we dislike)is a basic pillar of national defense.  The free market is wonderful but not always and not for everything.  It's a little like discussing market price for a commodity with a great income effect.

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: marvin kristein | 11/26/2005 at 12:14 AM</span>

---

Good, thank you, wonderful.
بنت مكه

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 06/24/2009 at 12:17 AM</span>

---

مركز تحميل

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 06/26/2009 at 10:20 PM</span>

---

بنت الزلفي

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 07/06/2009 at 08:04 PM</span>

---

Thank you, you always get to all new and used it 
شات صوتي

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 07/09/2009 at 09:27 AM</span>

---

Thank you, you always get to all new and used it 
شات 

دردشة

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 07/14/2009 at 11:00 AM</span>

---

Good evening. A boy can learn a lot from a dog: obedience, loyalty, and the importance of turning around three times before lying down.
I am from Kiribati and also now teach English, please tell me right I wrote the following sentence: "We are currently accepting applications for our citizens police academy."

Regards 8) Caterina.

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 07/14/2009 at 02:08 PM</span>

---

thanksss
شات مصر
--
دردشة مصرية

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 07/14/2009 at 08:16 PM</span>

---

دردشة
___
صور

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 07/17/2009 at 02:28 PM</span>

---

دردشة برق 


دردشة الخليج

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 07/29/2009 at 08:05 PM</span>

---

thanks to tell me that,i think thats so usefully----
tiffany 
links london

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 08/04/2009 at 02:27 AM</span>

---

Badly need your help. You can go a long way with bad legs and a good head.
I am from Cameroon and learning to write in English, give please true I wrote the following sentence: "This is because most panasonic air purifiers not only work to clean up the air, but they also work to clean up the smell of the room which they are in.However, not all air purifiers are safe and effective."

With love ;-), Pasha.

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 08/08/2009 at 09:27 AM</span>

---

Hello. The reasonable man adapts himself to the world; the unreasonable one persists in trying to adapt the world to himself. Therefore, all progress depends on the unreasonable man.
I am from Maldives and know bad English, tell me right I wrote the following sentence: "If you scroll down the page where the calculator is housed, you will find several articles discussing how to use it and strategies that follow from the findings derived from use of it and that sort of thing."

Thank you very much :(. Retirement planning survey.

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 08/13/2009 at 02:58 PM</span>

---

Good afternoon. There are admirable potentialities in every human being. Believe in your strength and your youth. Learn to repeat endlessly to yourself, 'It all depends on me.'
I am from East and learning to speak English, tell me right I wrote the following sentence: "Types of insurance including life insurance, term life, motor motorcycles,travel, business insurance, personal insurance."

With best wishes ;-), disability insurance leads.

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 08/18/2009 at 05:38 AM</span>

---

شات الشلة 


دردشة تعب قلبي

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 08/18/2009 at 08:02 PM</span>

---

شات دلع 


شات الود

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 08/18/2009 at 08:03 PM</span>

---

شات حبي 


شات الحب

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 08/18/2009 at 08:03 PM</span>

---

very thanks for article

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 08/22/2009 at 04:11 PM</span>

---

بنت 18
شات بنت 18

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 08/24/2009 at 02:07 AM</span>

---

ed hardy
tiffany jewelry

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 08/26/2009 at 04:55 AM</span>

---

tiffany jewellery
tiffany jewellery

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 08/26/2009 at 04:55 AM</span>

---

Very nice site! cheap viagra

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 09/13/2009 at 03:32 PM</span>

---

Very nice site!

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 09/13/2009 at 03:32 PM</span>

---

Just love tiffany  and ugg boots,thanks!!

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 09/18/2009 at 03:34 AM</span>

---

Hello Perdunky!

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 09/22/2009 at 06:00 AM</span>