---
title: "Antiterrorism Allocations--Becker"
date: 2006-06-11 13:11:00
permalink: 2006/06/antiterrorism-allocations--becker.html
---
Posner discusses many of the thorny issues involved in the 
allocation of funds by The Department of Homeland Security 
to American cities to combat terrorism. I will concentrate 
my comment on how to align the incentives of cities to those 
of the country as a whole.

Posner points out that there is  a conflict between the 
incentives of cities and those of the federal government. 
When cities do more to prevent terrorism against their 
residents and buildings, they also help the country fight 
terrorism against other cities and towns without getting 
compensated for that help. He also indicates that if the 
federal government simply gives money to cities, the cities 
may reduce the amounts they would otherwise spend fighting 
terrorism. Both problems arise in many infrastructure and 
entitlement programs, such as road-building, Medicare for 
the poor, and the fight against contagious diseases.

These sources of the tendency for cities to underspend on 
anti-terrorist activities can be at least partially overcome 
if Homeland Security did not outright give various amounts 
to different cities, but instead relied on the method used 
to combat similar issues that arise with other grant 
programs. The Department of Homeland Security should offer 
to give cities a certain number of dollars for each dollar 
they spend on antiterrorist activities. For example, if a 
city spent $30 million, they might get an additional $60 
million from the federal government. In this example, a city 
would get to spend $3 dollars for each dollar they used from 
their own funds to fight terrorism.

Federal matching of this type discourages cities from 
cutting back on their spending to fight terrorism since they 
lose say $3 dollars for each dollar they cut back. Matching 
grants also induce cities to give de facto recognition to 
the fact that each dollar they spend helps residents of 
other cities as well by improving the overall American fight 
against terrorism. The ratio of federal spending to city 
spending should be a measure of the ratio of the benefits to 
other cities compared to the benefits to the city spending 
their own money to fight terrorism.

The matching need not be independent of how cities spent 
their own monies. Cities are more likely on their own to 
spend on salaries than on capital goods that are produced 
elsewhere since spending on employees gives jobs to local 
residents. The matching grants should then be oriented 
toward capital spending rather than labor spending. In fact, 
the Homeland Security program is so oriented, and that seems 
to me to make some sense.

However, matching grants, particularly if the ratio of 
federal to local contributions is large, can create the 
opposite problem from that created by outright grants; 
namely, cities may spend too much since their spending is 
multiplied through the amounts available in matching funds. 
This is usually controlled by placing upper limits on the 
amounts that could be received in matching funds. Cities 
that are especially attractive to terrorist attacks--such as 
New York and Washington--would spend more fighting terrorism 
even without federal grants. Still, on their own they may 
not spend enough, so the upper limits they could receive in 
matching grants should exceed that available to say Kansas 
City.

One problem is that as coastal cities like Los Angeles, San 
Francisco, Boston, New York, and Washington became better 
prepared to fight terrorism, terrorists might shift inland, 
to places like Detroit, Chicago, Cleveland, Omaha, Topeka, 
and elsewhere. As the bombing in Oklahoma City showed, even 
attacks in smaller cities cause considerable fear and 
consternation. That is why a federal program has to be 
national, and target smaller places as well as larger ones. 
Matching grants encourage smaller cities also to contribute 
to the fight against terrorism, and they will spend more 
when they become more vulnerable after the more attractive 
terrorist targets became better prepared. So the system is 
partly self-correcting through the incentives that cities 
have to protect their own citizens. 

But matching grants do not solve all the problems of how to 
best allocate limited federal funds. So the federal 
government will still need some guidelines  that determine 
which cities should be given more Homeland money, although 
in a matched way.

<span style="color:#999">Posted at 01:11 PM</span>

<!-- more -->

---

### Comments

---

So the federal 
government will still need some guidelines that determine 
which cities should be given more Homeland money, although 
in a matched way.


The answer is easy. Give the most money to those cities in those districts and states where there is the greatest risk of a Republican incumbent losing in 2006 or a Republican challenger needs a boost to get over the top. That is likely on what the allocations are based.

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: W | 06/11/2006 at 09:32 PM</span>

---

Anti-terrorism allocations across states should be based on number of Muslims living in each state.  As an add-on special situations should be considered for extra allocations.  For example New York City should get a higher allocation for obvious reasons.  Home of Purdue University in Greater Lafayette, Indiana has a higher allocation caompared to towns of its size.  However given the threat level there, it should actually get more federal funding.

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Arun Khanna | 06/12/2006 at 11:12 AM</span>

---

Well, there is an answer.  Somewhat comforting.

Maybe the Bush Administration has *good reason* to not expect another attack?

Just a thought.  I mean, what if Bin Laden & Friends were on ice somewhere... just waiting for Bush to need another Zarqawi Moment... or maybe there is no need for an attack.

Bin Laden has GOTTEN everything for which he asked.

you *do* remember he has a Master's in Economics... 

I'd say, he got what he was seeking.  A financially crippled USA spending a fortune to hunt GHOSTS & a freaked out Canada... 

Just a thought.

Namaste
BlueBerry Pick'n
can be found @ ThisCanadian.com
"Silent Freedom is Freedom Silenced"

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: BlueBerry Pick'n is ThisCanadian.com | 06/13/2006 at 11:59 AM</span>

---

Anti-terrorism allocations across states should be based on number of Muslims living in each state.If you believe the Republicans, then, rather than funding the solution to a problem directly, it's better to let the funding trickle down to a problem. For example, rather than funding schools directly it's better to give tax cuts to the wealthy and let the money trickle down to the schools - it's the classic multiplier effect.What we need to do here, if you believe the Republicans, is exempt Muslims from paying taxes. That way, the money to fight terrorism will trickle down to the appropriate parts of the country along with a healthy multiplier effect to stimulate the economy in those areas most likely to be affected by terrorism.

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Wes | 06/16/2006 at 05:29 PM</span>

---

Wes: I am a Republican and you don't understand anti-terrorism or economics.

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Arun Khanna | 06/18/2006 at 10:52 AM</span>

---

"When cities do more to prevent terrorism against their residents and buildings, they also help the country fight terrorism against other cities and towns without getting compensated for that help"


Really? When I buy a car alarm and leave it blinking on my dashboard, I'm not helping in the country's fight against car theft. I'm just hoping that any potential car thief will decide that my car is too much trouble and go find a new target.  

Similarily, if New York turns itself into an impenetrable fortress, the terrorists plotting against it don't become accountants and graphic designers; they start looking at DC, Chicago and LA. For this reason, I think that the Feds should only be involved in security measures that reduce the total likelihood and expected severity of an attack, such as: bombing the bejesus out of hostile nations with WMD's in the makes; surveillance; Airport/coastal security.

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: New Jack | 06/18/2006 at 12:50 PM</span>

---

ŸÖÿ±ŸÉÿ≤ ÿ™ÿ≠ŸÖŸäŸÑ

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 06/27/2009 at 07:41 PM</span>

---

thanks for your post.perhaps you will like abercrombie

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 06/29/2009 at 04:20 AM</span>

---

ÿ®ŸÜÿ™ ÿßŸÑÿ≤ŸÑŸÅŸä

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 07/08/2009 at 05:01 AM</span>

---

ÿØÿ±ÿØÿ¥ÿ©
___
ÿµŸàÿ±

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 07/14/2009 at 11:58 PM</span>

---

Thank you, you always get to all new and used it 
ÿ¥ÿßÿ™ 

ÿØÿ±ÿØÿ¥Ÿá

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 07/19/2009 at 12:26 PM</span>

---

Very interesting site. Hope it will always be alive!

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 07/24/2009 at 06:45 PM</span>

---

Beautiful site!

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 07/24/2009 at 09:51 PM</span>

---

ÿØÿ±ÿØÿ¥ÿ© ÿ®ÿ±ŸÇ 


ÿØÿ±ÿØÿ¥ÿ© ÿßŸÑÿÆŸÑŸäÿ¨

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 07/30/2009 at 05:48 PM</span>

---

thanks to tell me that,i think thats so usefully----
tiffany jewelry 
links london

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 08/01/2009 at 02:56 AM</span>

---

Beautiful site!

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 08/01/2009 at 07:43 PM</span>

---

9I3xHq Perfect work!

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 08/03/2009 at 02:50 AM</span>

---

Good morning. The lesson which life repeats and constantly enforces is 'look under foot.' You are always nearer the divine and the true sources of your power than you think.
I am from Venezuela and now study English, tell me right I wrote the following sentence: "But online school programs for kids are also quickly becoming a staple in education."

Best regards :-), Ca online law school.

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 08/07/2009 at 05:21 AM</span>

---

Excuse me. No one gossips about other people's secret virtues.
I am from Republic and now study English, give please true I wrote the following sentence: "I like the kitchen table party idea, but I fear it might confuse those who don't have tables in their kitchen."

With best wishes 8-), Kitchen island butcher block top.

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 08/09/2009 at 12:28 PM</span>

---

ÿ¥ÿßÿ™ ÿßŸÑÿ¥ŸÑÿ© 


ÿØÿ±ÿØÿ¥ÿ© ÿ™ÿπÿ® ŸÇŸÑÿ®Ÿä

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 08/19/2009 at 07:53 AM</span>

---


ÿ¥ÿßÿ™ ÿ≠ÿ®Ÿä 


ÿ¥ÿßÿ™ ÿßŸÑÿ≠ÿ®

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 08/19/2009 at 07:55 AM</span>

---


ÿ¥ÿßÿ™ ÿØŸÑÿπ 


ÿ¥ÿßÿ™ ÿßŸÑŸàÿØ

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 08/19/2009 at 07:56 AM</span>

---

tiffany jewellery
ugg boots

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 08/20/2009 at 04:36 AM</span>

---

links of london
abercrombie and fitch

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 08/20/2009 at 04:37 AM</span>

---

very thanks for article

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 08/23/2009 at 07:26 PM</span>