---
title: "Agricultural Subsidies--Comment by Posner"
date: 2006-06-26 20:00:00
permalink: 80/2006/06/agricultural-subsidies--comment-by-posner.html
---
A government subsidy of the production of a good is defensible if the good generates external benefits, i.e., benefits not captured by the producer, in which event the good will be underproduced if left entirely to the market. This is not usually true of agricultural production. But Switzerland may be an exception because of its heavy dependence on tourism and the undoubted contribution that Swiss farms make to the beauty of the Swiss countryside. However, before determining how much of a subsidy to provide or indeed whether to provide any subsidy, one would have to determine how much and what kind of agriculture would be produced with no subsidy. Perhaps the reduction in agricultural acreage would be too slight to make significant inroads into tourist revenues. Assuming the effect could be measured, the proper method of financing the subsidy would be by a tax on the tourism industry. As for the form of the subsidy, this should depend on the effect on touristic values. The aim presumably would be to increase  the amount of agricultural acreage, and perhaps dairy production because the cows with their bells are, to the tourist, particularly attractive adornments of Swiss farms.

Quite apart from tourism, Swiss people themselves may derive pleasure from their agricultural countryside. That would constitute an additional external benefit that might justify subsidy, but it would be very hard to measure. "Contingent valuation" surveys ask people what they would pay for various environmental amenities if such amenities were priced. But the responses are not reliable. People are being asked to put a price on goods that are not sold in markets, and they have no relevant experience with pricing such goods. The surveys tend also to focus on a single amenity (as in my Swiss example), which produces exaggerated responses because the respondents are not being asked to allocate a limited budget among a range of possible subsidies.

Switzerland may be a special case; it is inconceivable that agricultural subsidies in general are justifiable in terms of positive externalities. A country like France, for example, which receives a quarter of the European Union's generous allocation for such subsidies, has highly productive agriculture and its huge tourist industry is far less dependent on bucolic vistas than Swiss tourism is. Agricultural subsidies generally reflect, as Becker points out, the operation of interest-group politics. A related feature in the European context is job protection--it may be especially difficult for many farmers to find alternative employment outside the agriculture sector.

Our ethanol subsidy is a particulary disgraceful example of the genre, especially given the availability of much cheaper sugar-based Brazilian ethanol blocked by a high tariff from competing with the ethanol produced from our corn. It is possible though unproven that ethanol as a fuel involves a net reduction in carbon dioxide emissions compared to gasoline and so may help to limit global warming. I qualify with "unproven" because while ethanol is not a fossil fuel and so burning it does not emit carbon dioxide, its production requires fossil fuel. Even if ethanol as a fuel has definite advantages from the standpoint of controlling global warming, this is a poor argument for a subsidy of it, as the subsidy can distort the efficient choice of inputs into the manufacture of fuel. Better would be a tax on carbon dioxide emissions; this would give producers and consumers of fuels and of products utilizing fuels, such as cars and electricity, an incentive to search out the cheapest substitutes for fossil fuels, which might or not include ethanol.

Although the percentage of farm revenues generated by subsidy is less than half in the United States what it is in the EU countries (16 percent versus 34 percent, according to the OECD study discussed by Becker), the efficient rate is probably zero. The fact that it is positive may reflect not just the operation of interest-group politics but the skewed representation of states in the U.S. Senate. Because each state has two Senators regardless of population, thinly populated agricultural states have disproportionate influence which they can use by means of logrolling to attract support for generous subsidies having no public-interest justification whatsoever.

<span style="color:#999">Posted at 08:00 PM</span>

<!-- more -->

---

### Comments

---

Although ethanol is not a fossil fuel, it is an organic molecule, and so its combustion produces carbon dioxide. C2H6O + 3 O2 --> 2 CO2 + 3 H2O.  So, in addition to its production (both in the engines of farm equipment, and in the fermentation process, which also produces CO2), its use also produces carbon dioxide, though as you correctly point out, it is difficult to say without empirical data whether it is a net decrease.  In practice it may be more energy-efficient than fossil fuels, and may combust more completely, yielding fewer other pollutants (which, all things equal, is advantageous).  If it can be made to produce the same amount of energy with less CO2 emission, a carbon tax would surely stimulate development here as well.

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Andrew Carlon | 06/26/2006 at 09:33 PM</span>

---

The fact that people give exaggerated responses to contingent valuation surveys reminds me of how in California, expensive ballot referendum programs always pass.

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Paul N | 06/26/2006 at 10:01 PM</span>

---

It seems to me that farming per se is world competitive in the U.S.  Subsidies skew the mix of crops and agricultural products in the U.S. 
A visit to the state fair is highly useful in thinking clearly about why we have ethanol and other subsidies. It is difficult for a 'low skill' farmer who has invested his or her human capital in a specific place and industry to retrain for a job in the city after a certain point in their life.

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Arun Khanna | 06/26/2006 at 11:40 PM</span>

---

I found Posner's discussion on why subsidies might be justified in Switzerland quite unconvincing. The reason is that farms' tourism externality is easily internalized, if it hasn't been already.

Those farms that are very scenic and conveniently located will find themselves able to attract busloads of fee-paying tourists eager to take snaps in front of manicured cows standing on lush Swiss hillsides. They might, almost incidentally, make money as well from actual farming operations. Farms unable to attract tourists will live or, in many cases I suspect, die according to their farming competitiveness.

The result without subsidies is that tourism continues largely or entirely unabated, and the 99% of farms not being snapped by tourists continue or shut down according to performance as farms.

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: ben | 06/27/2006 at 12:54 AM</span>

---

Thank for your very intersting comments about farm subsidies in Switzerland, where the question is a hot topic. 

If I understand your point correctly, the subsidies should be granted to small and beautiful farms and not to the big (by Swiss standards) and efficient (by Swiss standards also) ones? That is quite the opposite of the policy followed, but the idea is intersting.

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: LB | 06/27/2006 at 02:45 AM</span>

---

Although ethanol is not a fossil fuel, it is an organic molecule, and so its combustion produces carbon dioxide.Basically, plants make themselves out of air. In particular, they use energy from the sun to rip the carbon out of carbon dioxide and the hydrogens off of water (H2O). They also need a few minerals from the  ground but mostly plants are made out of carbon dioxide (and water).Over the (millions of) years, a whole lot of plants died and their remains got trapped underground in the form of oil and coal. This had the effect of trapping huge amounts of carbon dioxide and water underground (actually, just the carbon and hydrogen are trapped - the oxygen parts are in the atmosphere).Anyway, both ethanol and fossil fuels are made out of the carbon from carbon dioxide. When fossil fuels are burned that liberates carbon dioxide that had been trapped underground. When ethanol is burned it merely releases the carbon dioxide that was used to produce the ethanol in the first place.The only way that ethanol production liberates net carbon dioxide is if fossil fuels are pumped out of the ground and used in the ethanol production process.

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Wes | 06/27/2006 at 11:43 AM</span>

---

Wes

The only way that ethanol production liberates net carbon dioxide is if fossil fuels are pumped out of the ground and used in the ethanol production process.

They are. Natural gas is used in producing ethanol.

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: ben | 06/27/2006 at 04:46 PM</span>

---

The coastline in Cuba has nice framing land too that needs repair.  I understand Switzerland is a great country to visit and stay for a while.  If tourism is the reason for subsidies, only farms near highways and bylanes should be subsidized.

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Arun Khanna | 06/27/2006 at 06:14 PM</span>

---

Natural gas is used in producing ethanol.That is undoubtedly correct at some level but it is important to note that the statement "Natural gas must be used in producing ethanol." is totally false.In particular, it is entirely possible to produce ethanol from biomass without a net release of CO2. In fact, if any of the biomass ended up trapped in the ground then there would be a net trapping of CO2 out of the atmosphere.

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Wes | 06/27/2006 at 07:48 PM</span>

---

A historical note for Judge Posner's benefit:  the 1996 "Freedom to Farm" bill that reduced authorized levels of farm spending was heavily influenced by Sen. Richard Lugar's chairmanship of the Agriculture Committee.  The very expensive 2002 farm bill that increased spending on program crops was largely a product of the House Agriculture Committee.

Senators from small states can indeed exercise disproportionate influence over farm policy; on the big-ticket spending programs, though, such influence tends to be exercised mainly by Senators from small Southern states.  This is because it is in Southern states that most of the programs that cost large amounts of money but benefit a small number of farmers -- the cotton program, the rice program -- deposit most of their funds.  Even these programs also benefit from the support of the Texas and California delegations.

In the House, by contrast, an ancient coalition of farm-state Congressmen sticks together in defense of programs that have been around for a very long time, about which "non-Ag." Congressmen know next to nothing and are consequently ill-prepared to reform.  Twenty years ago, when the United States had a Republican administration, the weakness of prospective farm program reformers was offset somewhat by an anti-subsidy OMB and Agriculture Department leadership.  Yet even so the defenders of traditional programs, with inertia on their side, won many more battles than they lost.

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Zathras | 06/27/2006 at 08:00 PM</span>

---

Wes

"Natural gas must be used in producing ethanol." 

Sorry, who said that? Not me.

Nearly all ethanol production uses natural gas or, increasingly, coal for production.

Going back to your original point:

The only way that ethanol production liberates net carbon dioxide is if fossil fuels are pumped out of the ground and used in the ethanol production process.

Which is precisely how most ethanol is currently produced.

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: ben | 06/27/2006 at 09:33 PM</span>

---

In re greenhouse gases, the main benefit of biomass fuels like ethanol would be the carbon dioxide that would be recaptured from the atmosphere during plant growth.

We could achieve about the same effect by growing or subsidizing the growth of the same amount of plant material, and directing it to other purposes: making buildings or roads or giant numbers of sailboats out of it, perhaps.  Products that are durable or ultimately end up buried in the ground would be preferable to anything that is likely to be burned.

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Richard Mason | 06/28/2006 at 09:44 AM</span>

---

When it comes to bio-energy, ethanol is just one aspect of the equation, others include bio-diesel (from soybeans), bagasse, etc.. B.P. has already stepped up with a 500 million grant to commercially develop bio-fuels. Large numbers of Universities are falling all over themselves to get their hands on it. Is energy/food independence a good thing? If so, the subsidies are going to keep on being handed out.

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: N.E.Hatfield | 06/28/2006 at 01:43 PM</span>

---

Products that are durable or ultimately end up buried in the ground would be preferable to anything that is likely to be burned.Or we could do both: produce enough ethanol to power our cars and also produce durable/buried plant products to replace the coal and oil we've already released into the atmosphere.


<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Wes | 06/28/2006 at 07:29 PM</span>

---

One question I haven't seen addressed is how to prevent American policymakers from charging everyone for something that only benefits a few. While Judge Posner's post explains how this could be done in Switzerland [a tax on tourism, which benefits from the subsidy], farms in France, Japan, and the US, for example, don't have that positive externality. Instead, they have what is essentially existence value, in the sense that people who would never go to a farm themselves still want it to exist, like many people want the Alaskan Wildlife Refuge to remain unperturbed even though no one is ever going to go there. Given that there is no obvious beneficiary, how can subsidies of this sort be made more fair, that is, be paid more by people who care about the subsidy than those who don't?

This is obviously a purely theoretical question, since politicians have never cared about whether taxpayers pay for something they don't like or derive no benefit from. Else congress would be much smaller.

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Haris | 06/30/2006 at 05:52 AM</span>

---

The welfare and inherent efficiency costs of protection are huge: not only for the 'protected' country itself, but for the world at large. However, it is likely that the marginal political cost of moving towards freer trade and policy heavily outweights the benefit.

Take sugar as an example: A proposed aspect of the Australian-USA FTA was the 'opening up' of the protected American sugar market to Australian producers of sugar. Ultimately, this proposition failed (undoubtebly due to the political influence wielded by those who receive protection in the sugar-farming states).

However, this example allows us to illustrate the economic cost due to the restrictions or 'protection' on trade. The USA suffers from:

(1) A higher price for sugar (estimated to be almost 4 times higher than the market price); estimated to cost over $2billion anually for US consumers.
(2) An estimated 7,500 to 10,000 jobs lost since 1997 because of artificially high sugar prices.

The gains in moving towards a freerer agricultural policy are self evident in this instance. Abolition of the sugar program would result in a net annual welfare gain to the US economy of more than $1 billion (US International Trade Commission, June 2002).

The US sugar program is almost a textbook case of concentrated benefits and diffused costs. A very small number of sugar growers receive enormous benefits, while the costs of this protection and subsidies are spread across the entire economy (thus it can be said that the MPB exceeds the MPC and it is likely that protection will remain until they are equal, or the MPC of removing the trade distortion becomes less than the MPB accrued in keeping it).

Consequently, US sugar producers have a very strong incentive to lobby and fund campaigns of US policymakers who in turn support their industry. Thus, whilst the economically rational solution would appear to be a simple one (remove the protection), many difficulties are encountered in the political sphere. 

Sugar stands as a good example of the inherent inefficiences of high marginal political costs and their conflict with minimising opportunity cost. The sugar industry is indicative of more widespread problems with freeing up agricultural policy within rich nations.

It is unlikely (in the short to mid-term, at least) that much progress will be made. However, as pressure continues to mount, perhaps breakthoughs on a bilateral level may presage a wider multilateral policy push (something of the Doha-round ilk, but hopefully more succesful). This remains to be seen.

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Drossos Stamboulakis | 07/01/2006 at 09:28 AM</span>

---

مركز تحميل

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 06/26/2009 at 11:47 PM</span>

---

thanks for your post.perhaps you will like ed hardy

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 06/30/2009 at 01:30 AM</span>

---

بنت الزلفي

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 07/07/2009 at 04:20 AM</span>

---

Thank you, you always get to all new and used it 
شات صوتي

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 07/10/2009 at 02:13 PM</span>

---

Nice site - pity you have to go to such lengths to moderate it.
I am from African and bad know English, give please true I wrote the following sentence: "Combating and winning the battle of excessive sweating."

With respect ;-), Alistair.

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 07/12/2009 at 05:00 AM</span>

---

IlmR4f

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 07/13/2009 at 11:18 PM</span>

---

thanksss
شات مصر
--
دردشة مصرية

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 07/14/2009 at 07:29 PM</span>

---

Give please. The reason why worry kills more people than work is that more people worry than work.
I am from Nicaragua and know bad English, please tell me right I wrote the following sentence: "Kimlor products include comforters, comforter sets, window."

Best regards 8-), Romola.

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 07/14/2009 at 11:46 PM</span>

---

Thank you, you always get to all new and used it 
شات 

دردشه

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 07/19/2009 at 12:14 PM</span>