---
title: ""
date: 2006-03-12 15:39:00
permalink: 2006/03/we-will-be-blogging-on-the-controversy-over-dubais-proposed-and-now-abandoned-acquisition-of-us-port-operations-tomorro.html
---
We will be blogging on the controversy over Dubai's proposed (and now abandoned)  acquisition of U.S. port operations tomorrow (Monday).

<span style="color:#999">Posted at 03:39 PM</span>

<!-- more -->

---

### Comments

---

Please note that the sentiment is just against UAE, see

http://transcripts.cnn.com/TRANSCRIPTS/0603/02/ldt.01.html

"
CASEY WIAN, CNN CORRESPONDENT: Say "Costco" and most Americans think big-box discount retailer. But another COSCO without the "T" operates at the Port of Long Beach, California, and the China ocean shipping company is controlled by the government of Communist China. Through a joint venture with the U.S. Stevedoring Company, COSCO operates one of the largest container terminals on the West Coast.

Across the harbor at the Port of Los Angeles, another Chinese government-owned company, China Shipping, operates its own 75-acre port terminal facility. Port terminal operators are responsible for implementing homeland security procedures. "

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 03/12/2006 at 10:43 PM</span>

---

Good, thank you, wonderful..
بنت مكه

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 06/24/2009 at 12:31 AM</span>

---

مركز تحميل

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 06/26/2009 at 10:11 PM</span>

---

بنت الزلفي

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 07/06/2009 at 09:35 PM</span>

---

Thank you, you always get to all new and used it 
شات صوتي

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 07/09/2009 at 06:30 AM</span>

---

How are you. Obscurity is a good thing. You can fail in obscurity. It removes the fear of failure.
I am from Brunei and too bad know English, give please true I wrote the following sentence: "Stop excessive sweating stop excessive sweating."

:D Thanks in advance. Thaddeus.

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 07/12/2009 at 09:02 AM</span>

---

شات مصر
--
دردشة مصرية

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 07/14/2009 at 06:02 PM</span>

---

Hello everyone. My wish is to ride the tempest, tame the waves, kill the sharks. I will not resign myself...
I am from Kuwait and bad know English, give please true I wrote the following sentence: "Apply for fingerhut credit to buy bedding, comforter sets."

Waiting for a reply :-), Zelda.

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 07/15/2009 at 01:17 AM</span>

---

شات سعودي
00
دردشة سعودي

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 07/15/2009 at 07:08 PM</span>

---

دردشة
___
صور

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 07/18/2009 at 01:36 PM</span>

---

Thank you, you always get to all new and used it 
شات 

دردشه

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 07/19/2009 at 08:34 AM</span>

---

دردشة برق 


دردشة الخليج

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 07/30/2009 at 05:23 PM</span>

---

thanks to tell me that,i think thats so usefully----
tiffany 
links london

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 08/03/2009 at 03:57 AM</span>

---

Good morning. Wisdom is knowing what to do next; virtue is doing it.
I am from Central and now study English, tell me right I wrote the following sentence: "Yiu will only need to flip a switch and the mighty boss vacuum cleaner will transform from bare floors to plush carpet cleaners."

Thank you so much for your future answers ;).  Water filter vacuum cleaner.

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 08/06/2009 at 01:01 PM</span>

---

Hello everyone. Summer afternoon - Summer afternoon... the two most beautiful words in the English language.
I am from Djibouti and also am speaking English, give true I wrote the following sentence: "These cabinets go great with empire vanities."

With respect :), The bathroom on furniture.

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 08/11/2009 at 10:49 AM</span>

---

Good afternoon!.
I am from Sierra and also now'm speaking English, please tell me right I wrote the following sentence: "Robots cheap tickets cheapest airfares."

With love :D, Cheap low airfare to europe.

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 08/16/2009 at 06:55 AM</span>

---

Nice site - pity you have to go to such lengths to moderate it.
I am from East and , too, and now am writing in English, give true I wrote the following sentence: "Charting application for beginning traders."

THX :-(, Mercer.

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 08/18/2009 at 03:18 PM</span>

---

tiffany jewellery
ugg boots

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 08/20/2009 at 04:05 AM</span>

---

links of london
abercrombie and fitch

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 08/20/2009 at 04:06 AM</span>

---

very thanks for article

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 08/23/2009 at 07:04 AM</span>

---

بنت 18
شات بنت 18

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 08/24/2009 at 02:02 AM</span>

---

ed hardy
tiffany jewellery

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 08/27/2009 at 04:45 AM</span>

---

ed hardy
tiffany jewelry

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 08/27/2009 at 04:45 AM</span>

---

tiffany jewellery
tiffany jewellery

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 08/27/2009 at 04:45 AM</span>

---

Just love tiffany  and ugg boots,thanks!!

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 09/19/2009 at 01:36 AM</span>