---
title: "Notice"
date: 2007-05-19 10:53:00
permalink: 2007/05/notice.html
---
Professor Becker and I will not be posting this weekend. We will resume next weekend.

<span style="color:#999">Posted at 10:53 AM</span>

<!-- more -->

---

### Comments

---

I learn a lot from your blog. Thank you very much!

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: qi | 05/21/2007 at 10:41 AM</span>

---

As a technical matter, you have posted.  

Just kidding, we all look forward to your return.  Perhaps you could address the recent study that found reduced worker productivity in OECD countries that raised income tax rates.  The study, called Long-Term Changes in Labor Supply and Taxes: Evidence from OECD Countries, 1956-2004 and is avialable by Andrea Raffo (Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Economic Research Department), Lee Ohanian (UCLA, Economics Department) & Richard Rogerson (Arizona State University, Economics Department), is available on SSRN.

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: guy in the veal calf office | 05/21/2007 at 02:42 PM</span>

---

Dear Sirs,

Thank you for your blog. It is geat to read what two great minds think about. I really liked reading about Larry Summers. Very interesting. What you have to say about undergraduate education at Harvard is also interesting.

In your opinion, why is not there more federally funded neuroscientific (neurobiological research) into the so many different types of brain diseases: autism (according to the CDC, 1 in 166 or 150 children), Alzheimers, Parkinson's, ADHD, Learning Disabilities. These diseases are as important as cancer and heart disease, in my view, and should be addressed from both a genetic and environmental point of causation.

Certain visionaries like: Dr James Simons ($30 million) have provided neuroscientific funding at Yale, Columbia, Cold Spring Harbor Labs (Dr. James Watson), and MIT; Eli Broad ($8.9 million)at Cal Tech, and Mr and Mrs Jeffry Picower ($50 million) for the Picower Institute at MIT. The Howard Hughes Medical Institute, outside of Washington, also has a new neuroscience research institute.

As a father with a son on the autistic spectrum, autism appears to be on the rise at a geater cost to society than ever before. Special Ed is one of Chancellor Joel Klein's primary focuses as it pervades the NYC Public School System. We are lucky to have able leaders like Mayor Bloomberg and Chancellor Joel Klein on the education watch here in New York. It really does feel like a pandemic out there having lived with autism since 1993.

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: robert buxton | 05/22/2007 at 07:05 AM</span>

---

To the above poster about labor supply and income tax:  Edward Prescott of Arizona State won a Nobel Prize in 2004 for a paper on a very similar subject, about the relation of labor supply and income tax.  A tax on labor lowers the demand for labor but leaves consumption fixed.  If both consumption and labor are taxed, optimal quantities of both will drop.

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: avatara | 05/25/2007 at 01:09 AM</span>

---

My thoughts on the War Situation:

Those who start wars, never fight them
And those who fight wars, they never like them
And those who write laws, can recite them
And those who fight laws, they live and die by them

Artist: Michael Franti And Spearhead
Album: Other Song Lyrics
Title: Time To Go Home

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 05/26/2007 at 05:45 PM</span>

---

My thoughts on the War Situation:

Those who start wars, never fight them
And those who fight wars, they never like them
And those who write laws, can recite them
And those who fight laws, they live and die by them

Artist: Michael Franti And Spearhead
Album: Other Song Lyrics
Title: Time To Go Home

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: blog2.zingip.com | 05/26/2007 at 05:46 PM</span>

---

Perhaps Judge Posner may post regarding the kind hat tip he got from the Supreme Court this week.

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Jake | 05/26/2007 at 06:44 PM</span>

---


Bush Declares Himself Dictator Under New Martial Law Provisions 
 - www.jonesreport.com/articles/230507_bush_martial_law.html

You live in the NORTH AMERICAN UNION - did you know?
 - www.stopthenorthamericanunion.com

www.wnd.com  World Net Daily News
www.gunowners.org
www.jackmclamb.net
www.judicialwatch.org

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: ameriKa | 05/27/2007 at 02:12 PM</span>

---

Thank u for your announcement
serious to say,i love your blog very much
but i advise u to place some more details when u describe the technique.

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: wow power leveling | 05/28/2007 at 08:01 AM</span>

---


thanks for your post.perhaps you will like ed hardy

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 06/29/2009 at 04:40 AM</span>

---

مركز تحميل

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 07/03/2009 at 04:27 PM</span>

---

العاب
___
شات

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 07/14/2009 at 04:28 AM</span>

---

دردشة
___
صور

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 07/19/2009 at 09:05 AM</span>

---

Thank you, you always get to all new and used it 
شات 

دردشه

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 07/20/2009 at 05:28 PM</span>

---

Perfect work!

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 07/23/2009 at 06:20 AM</span>

---

Very interesting site. Hope it will always be alive!

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 07/23/2009 at 06:28 AM</span>

---

It is the coolest site, keep so!

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 07/24/2009 at 05:33 AM</span>

---

Very interesting site. Hope it will always be alive!

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 07/24/2009 at 04:30 PM</span>

---

دردشة برق 


دردشة الخليج

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 07/30/2009 at 07:09 PM</span>

---

thanks to tell me that,i think thats so usefully----
tiffany jewelry 
links london

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 08/01/2009 at 04:24 AM</span>

---

Perfect site, i like it!

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 08/01/2009 at 03:28 PM</span>

---

kLQpJk Incredible site!

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 08/02/2009 at 03:37 AM</span>

---

xVPWJy Very interesting site. Hope it will always be alive!

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 08/02/2009 at 07:30 PM</span>

---

Beautiful site!

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 08/03/2009 at 10:39 AM</span>

---

Beautiful site!

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 08/03/2009 at 10:40 AM</span>