---
title: "AIDS in Africa--Posner's Response to Comments"
date: 2007-01-14 13:32:00
permalink: 2007/01/aids-in-africa--posners-response-to-comments.html
---
One comment in particular merits a response: that Botswana, one of the best-governed countries in sub-Saharan Africa, and one of the most prosperous (its GDP per capita is about $10,000, and thus close to the Republic of South Africa's $12,200), has one of the highest AIDS rates in Africa (24 percent), and therefore I am wrong to suggest that bad government and poverty are the roots of Africa's disproportionate incidence of HIV-AIDS. I had pointed out, however, that the factors that influence a country's AIDS rate are multiple. One of them is migrant labor, which facilitates prostitution and casual sex. Botswana sends many of its workers to South Africa, and also sits astride major north-south traffic arteries. In addition, its relative prosperity has led to rapid urbanization, and cities provide greater opportunities for casual sex than rural areas. Another factor that has undoubtedly influenced the AIDS rate in Botswana is that the AIDS epidemic started in southern Africa, which is probably why the highest African AIDS rates are in the countries of southern Africa, which include Botswana. The epidemic had already spread widely before preventive measures, including education in the danger of the disease, were taken. But that of course cannot explain why Botswana's AIDS rate is higher even than South Africa's.

A further point about Botswana is that although its average income is high, because of its diamond mines and tourist attractions, the income is very unevenly allocated. Most of the population is very poor (30 percent are below the poverty level) and 20 percent are illiterate. However, a wealthy country with many poor can pay for public health, and in fact Botswana has an advanced program for combating AIDS by education, free condoms, etc., and has had it for a number of years, so it is a puzzle why the overall incidence of HIV-AIDS remains so high.

I want to emphasize two other factors that did not receive adequate attention in my original post. One is that short life expectancies reduce the cost of risky behavior: a 25 percent risk of dying from AIDS is very high, but the expected cost of death that is generated by that risk is lower the higher the probability of dying young from some other disease, a probability much higher in sub-Saharan Africa than in the United States. Another factor is the prevalence of other sexually transmitted diseases, such as syphilis, which increase susceptibility to infection by the AIDS virus. Both of these points are discussed in an early article by Tomas J. Philipson and me on AIDS in Africa--“The Microeconomics of the AIDS Epidemic in Africa,” 21 Population and Development Review 835 (1995)--and in a more recent article by Emily Oster, "Sexually Transmitted Infections, Sexual Behavior and the HIV/AIDS Epidemic," 120 Quarterly Journal of Economics 467 (2005). We note in our article the curious positive correlation in Africa of AIDS with education, and suggest that educated Africans are likely to be urban and therefore have more opportunities for casual sex. On the economics of AIDS generally, see also Philipson's and my book Private Choices and Public Health: The AIDS Epidemic in an Economic Perspective (1993).

<span style="color:#999">Posted at 01:32 PM</span>

<!-- more -->

---

### Comments

---

Legalize prostitution and allow brothels to monitor their employees for AIDS. Permit an insurance market to develop that will pay brothel patrons who contract the disease.

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Chairman Mao | 01/14/2007 at 06:06 PM</span>

---

Legalize prostitution and allow brothels to monitor their employees for AIDS. Permit an insurance market to develop that will pay brothel patrons who contract the disease.

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Chairman Mao | 01/14/2007 at 06:09 PM</span>

---

Yes,in many countries,there are snugly “brothels”.
Why the government don not legalize prostitution.I think this is a shortcut to solve AIDS.In market economy,there need supply and demand!

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: linshenjie | 01/14/2007 at 07:07 PM</span>

---

What is the responsibility of religious groups such as the Catholic Church in all of this?

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Benzion Chinn | 01/14/2007 at 07:42 PM</span>

---

I want to bring light to Posner's suggestion that the AIDS epidemic started in Southern Africa. It is actually not terribly clear where exactly the AIDS epidemic started (discovered in the US, but there are samples of tissue that date back to 1969 in the US, 1979 in Norway, and 1959 in the DRC). The most conclusive evidence sets Africa as the starting continent -- but suggests somewhere between Cameroon and the DRC, if you want to get country-specific. According to my map, these countries are in West and Central Africa, not Southern. It's a long way from Kinshasa to Gabarone...

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: kim dionne | 01/14/2007 at 10:56 PM</span>

---

B. Chinh above is right. The epicenter of the HIV and AIDs epidemic in Africa was the Central Africa region and that explains largely the high incidence of illnesses that afflicted Uganda, Burundi and Rwanda to a lesser extent. This too explains the delayed rise of infection in the West of Africa and into North Africa too.

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: owinok | 01/18/2007 at 04:42 AM</span>

---


thanks for your post.perhaps you will like ed hardy

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 06/29/2009 at 03:15 AM</span>

---

Thank you, you always get to all new and used it 
شات 

دردشه

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 07/20/2009 at 05:06 PM</span>

---

Excellent site. It was pleasant to me.

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 07/23/2009 at 12:08 AM</span>

---

If you have to do it, you might as well do it right.

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 07/23/2009 at 07:44 AM</span>

---

Excellent site. It was pleasant to me.

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 07/23/2009 at 08:15 AM</span>

---

I bookmarked this link. Thank you for good job!

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 07/24/2009 at 04:21 PM</span>

---

Great site. Keep doing.

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 07/24/2009 at 06:35 PM</span>

---

دردشة برق 


دردشة الخليج

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 07/30/2009 at 06:46 PM</span>

---

Very interesting site. Hope it will always be alive!

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 07/30/2009 at 10:13 PM</span>

---

u37rL8 It is the coolest site, keep so!

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 08/02/2009 at 06:44 AM</span>

---

iFCOyt Beautiful site!

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 08/02/2009 at 08:46 PM</span>

---

I bookmarked this link. Thank you for good job!

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 08/03/2009 at 10:51 AM</span>

---

Great work, webmaster, nice design!

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 08/03/2009 at 02:14 PM</span>

---

Great work, webmaster, nice design!

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 08/03/2009 at 02:15 PM</span>

---

If you have to do it, you might as well do it right.

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 08/03/2009 at 10:35 PM</span>

---

Great. Now i can say thank you!

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 08/04/2009 at 11:27 AM</span>

---

Great site. Good info.

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 08/08/2009 at 01:22 PM</span>

---

I want to say - thank you for this!

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 08/08/2009 at 06:25 PM</span>

---

Great work, webmaster, nice design!

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 08/12/2009 at 08:46 PM</span>