---
title: ""
date: 2007-06-24 20:06:00
permalink: 2007/06/womens-economic-role--posners-response-to-comments--there-were-some-excellent-comments-on-my-posted-comment-of-a-couple-of.html
---
Women's Economic Role--Posner's Response to Comments

There were some excellent comments on my posted comment of a couple of weeks ago, which I have been slow in responding to. One commenter pointed out that a possible reason for colleges to favor male applicants is that there is greater variance in performance among men than among women, and so, in the words of the commenter, "colleges, especially the good ones, tend to be risk-takers in admission, since it is disproportionately valuable for them to get the very top students." Another comment points out that a college may want to admit a certain minimum number of men in order to provide more dating opportunities for women. Maybe there is a tipping phenomenon at work as well--that if there are too few men, male applications drop because men don't want to be thought attending a "women's college."

A number of comments expressed puzzlement with the proposition that the higher average grades of women could signify discrimination in favor of men rather than of women. The puzzlement is understandable because of a typo: in the third line of my post, for which I apologize: "men" should be "women." The easiest way to understand the point is to imagine that the average woman's grade point average is an A and the average man's a D. Then it would be evident that the college was discriminating in favor of men, because it was admitting D men in preference to A or B women (I say "or B"  to allow for the possibility that the college has admitted all its A applicants)

Another comment pointed out that if there is discrimination in the job market, women will have a stronger incentive than men to get good grades in order to improve their job-market prospects. Anti-Semitism has been thought a factor in pushing Jews to excel in their studies.

<span style="color:#999">Posted at 08:06 PM</span>

<!-- more -->

---

### Comments

---

A high level of intelligence should be an electoral prerequisite for the president of the United States, and for that matter, all world leaders. Obviously, there is no way to make an objective determination of the candidates IQ, but there are certain indicators that the electorate can rely on if it deemed intelligence to be an important characteristic.  I agree with the premise that the execution of the administration's policies may be accomplished more effectively if high level departmental officials were drawn from the pool of competent and dedicated civil servants, regardless of their actual "intelligence". 

On the other hand, our elected president, and his or her closest advisors should be the best and brightest that we can find.  The world continues to become increasingly complex, geopolitically, economically and technologically.  Every action taken by the leadership of first world nations and in particular the United States causes reverberations throughout the world, politically, economically and environmentally.  Many of the results are unintended and unforeseen.  We must have leaders who have the ability to spot more of the potential raminfications of their decisions and who have the ability to identify and select close advisors who have broad and open minds and who can assist in this "issue spotting."

Certainly, highly intelligent individuals can be ineffective leaders, due to their occasional inability to communicate their thoughts and ideas, but those who have the sense to ensure that competent, hard working people with good common sense are in place at high levels of executory departments to carry out well planned and conceived policies, should be extremely effective leaders

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Evan Hughes | 06/26/2007 at 09:57 AM</span>

---

Good, thank you, wonderful
بنت مكه

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 06/24/2009 at 12:20 AM</span>

---

thanks for your post.perhaps you will like abercrombie

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 06/29/2009 at 04:09 AM</span>

---

بنت الزلفي

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 07/07/2009 at 04:22 AM</span>

---

Thank you, you always get to all new and used it 
شات صوتي

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 07/10/2009 at 01:57 PM</span>

---

thanksss
شات مصر
--
دردشة مصرية

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 07/14/2009 at 07:17 PM</span>

---

Sorry. I like to play blackjack. I'm not addicted to gambling, I'm addicted to sitting in a semi-circle.
I am from Australia and too bad know English, give true I wrote the following sentence: "Online renters insurance quote how to get the cheapest."

Thanks :D. Loura.

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 07/17/2009 at 09:41 AM</span>

---

دردشة
___
صور

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 07/17/2009 at 02:53 PM</span>

---

Thank you, you always get to all new and used it 
شات 

دردشه

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 07/20/2009 at 05:36 PM</span>

---

Very interesting site. Hope it will always be alive!

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 07/23/2009 at 02:02 AM</span>

---

Very interesting site. Hope it will always be alive!

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 07/23/2009 at 09:39 AM</span>

---

Great site. Good info.

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 07/23/2009 at 11:01 AM</span>

---

Great site. Keep doing.

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 07/23/2009 at 05:24 PM</span>

---

I want to say - thank you for this!

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 07/24/2009 at 01:10 AM</span>

---

It is the coolest site, keep so!

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 07/24/2009 at 06:43 PM</span>

---

Incredible site!

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 07/24/2009 at 09:47 PM</span>

---

Great. Now i can say thank you!

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 07/25/2009 at 04:09 AM</span>

---

دردشة برق 


دردشة الخليج

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 07/30/2009 at 07:17 PM</span>

---

Perfect work!

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 07/31/2009 at 12:12 AM</span>

---

thanks to tell me that,i think thats so usefully----
tiffany jewelry 
links london

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 08/01/2009 at 03:46 AM</span>

---

dEE64c Incredible site!

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 08/03/2009 at 02:45 AM</span>

---

Very nice site! cheap viagra

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 08/03/2009 at 04:12 PM</span>

---

Very nice site!

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 08/03/2009 at 04:12 PM</span>

---

Very nice site! cheap viagra

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 08/05/2009 at 03:39 AM</span>

---

Very nice site!

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 08/05/2009 at 03:40 AM</span>