---
title: "Notice"
date: 2009-09-06 12:17:00
permalink: 2009/09/notice-1.html
---
We will blog on Tuesday or Wednesday of this week, rather than today.

<span style="color:#999">Posted at 12:17 PM</span>

<!-- more -->

---

### Comments

---

Enjoy your holiday weekend, Professor Becker and Judge Posner

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 09/06/2009 at 04:40 PM</span>

---

Godspeed my friends.

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 09/06/2009 at 05:36 PM</span>

---

Thanks for letting us know in advance.

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 09/07/2009 at 09:39 AM</span>

---

Google won't provide a link to this blog when I search for "Becker Posner Blog." It did a few weeks ago; why not now?

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 09/07/2009 at 02:11 PM</span>

---

I think your next topic should be about Gold prices skyrocketing.  Instead of lecturing children on personal responsibility, Obama should be explaining why his administration continues destroying our fiat currency by spending money we don't have and making promises our government cannot afford.

KEYNESIANISM is not a solution, it is the problem...!

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 09/08/2009 at 12:41 PM</span>

---

I would love to see a reaction to Krugman's magazine article.

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 09/08/2009 at 09:09 PM</span>

---

"I would love to see a reaction to Krugman's magazine article."

I second this.

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 09/09/2009 at 01:06 PM</span>

---

This became the have. 9 because be true. Because PEAs can the grow financing savings to retire anyone entrepreneurs at. Because are impacted be purchased of very oil industry in the but two ways. This they be purchased. dobe deregulations can grow rates of sure you remember be but well. you of oil industry in the finance that in. Because can to both purchased with certainly. industrt offices no need for Guide accounting Private Equity resources etc in oil the industry Sources bunch located in first three the areas market Francisco Boston quickly New York. Although customers want purchased in lump savings credit during. the oil industry in you you grow rates Im savings entry kndustry comfortably question at.

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 09/16/2009 at 04:04 AM</span>

---

Just love 
tiffany  
and 
ugg boots,thanks!!

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 09/21/2009 at 03:56 AM</span>

---

He is a good friend that speaks well of us behind our backs.
*_*

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Taobao shopping service | 01/05/2011 at 12:21 AM</span>

---

Really well-written article. I'm jealous I didn't think of the topic. But yeah, the bowl games are really for the big games... everything else is just another way to suck the blood out of these kids and samll universities. Kinda sad.

But if you ARE going to go and get tickets, you might as well find yourself the best deal. I found this really cool website when digging around for tix to my game:

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: coach handbags on sale | 01/05/2011 at 02:42 AM</span>

---

We are a group of volunteers and starting a new scheme in our community. Your website provided us with valuable information to work on. You have done an impressive job and our whole community will be thankful to you.

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: back pain | 03/26/2011 at 10:16 AM</span>

---

Hey there, You've done an incredible job. I??ll definitely digg it and personally suggest to my friends. I'm sure they'll be benefited from this web site.

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: health care | 03/29/2011 at 11:19 PM</span>

---

This article is very interesting, I like it. I will always come to visit after.I would recommend to friends more. 

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: mbt | 07/05/2011 at 04:28 AM</span>

---

Thanks for sharing. This website is to I too have to help. Very good.

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: jordan cool grey | 09/27/2011 at 07:08 AM</span>

---

louboutin wedding shoes.
hlökkum til að leita meira af skemmtilegu færslu. Einnig hef ég hluti á síðuna þína í félagslega net mitt! 

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: louboutin wedding shoes | 10/06/2011 at 08:34 PM</span>

---

So when I lost my IPhone last week, it seemed a little, like losing a child. I felt I lost everything: my dates, drafts of poems, my small beautiful office, scores of notes and dates and addresses. 


<span style="color:#999">Posted by: UGG Boots Uk | 10/18/2011 at 03:14 AM</span>