---
title: "Notice"
date: 2009-09-20 15:37:00
permalink: ttps://web.archive.org/web/20171227071208/http://www.becker-posner-blog.com:80/2009/09/notice.html
---
We will not be blogging this week. We will next blog next Sunday, September 27.

<span style="color:#999">Posted at 03:37 PM</span>

<!-- more -->

---

### Comments

---

While the deficits caused by the fiscal stimulus package will end in 2011 and will help to sustain a fragile recovery in 2010, the deficits projected for the longer term are a threat to economic future
resveratrol supplements

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 09/21/2009 at 12:21 AM</span>

---

While the deficits caused by the fiscal stimulus package will end in 2011 and will help to sustain a fragile recovery in 2010, the deficits projected for the longer term are a threat to our economic future
resveratrol supplements

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 09/21/2009 at 12:22 AM</span>

---

While the deficits caused by the fiscal stimulus package will end in 2011 and will help to sustain a fragile recovery in 2010, the deficits projected for the longer term are a threat to our economic future
resveratrol supplements

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 09/21/2009 at 12:25 AM</span>

---

Just love 
tiffany  
and 
ugg boots,thanks!!

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anonymous | 09/21/2009 at 03:57 AM</span>

---

Interesting writing! Are there any predictions that you maybe willing to divulge in order to illustrate your second section a bit more? cheers

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: oil paintings | 09/01/2010 at 10:32 PM</span>

---

Eating apple is a good way for your health. WISH GOOD HEALTH FOR YOU!

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: air jordan 11 | 11/02/2010 at 05:50 AM</span>

---

Such a great speech, thanks for bringing it to my attention!*

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: coach outlet stores | 11/02/2010 at 09:39 PM</span>

---

This is a great idea to enhance personal lives and business. Love it..


<span style="color:#999">Posted by: cheap air yeezy | 11/03/2010 at 10:17 PM</span>

---

Oh I do hope to visit some day! What a great place to work!

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: ugg shoes | 11/06/2010 at 02:19 AM</span>

---

Hey there, You've done an incredible job. I??ll definitely digg it and personally suggest to my friends. I'm sure they'll be benefited from this web site.

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: health care | 03/29/2011 at 11:20 PM</span>

---

Managers must understand that while intrinsic motivation is better and far more economical at motivating employees to be creative, productive, and loyal; it is also creates a long term commitment of honoring that social relationship. The reason intrinsic motivation works so well is that in addition to market capital it uses social capital to dramatically increase the employees valuation of their time. Employees feel they are getting the better end of the bargain and are willing to work harder

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: True Religion Outlet | 07/20/2011 at 04:00 AM</span>

---

The government of Andhra Pradesh has imposed strict limitations on microlending, 

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Cheap Bags | 09/07/2011 at 10:01 AM</span>

---

I want all the stuff about Season 3 and I want no more loan comments! Now-se!

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: jordan jams | 09/25/2011 at 02:01 PM</span>

---

Liked you on Facebook, too. =)

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: manolo blahnik shoes | 09/28/2011 at 01:20 PM</span>

---

Thanks, I'm going to have nightmares tonight.

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Designer LV | 01/11/2012 at 07:26 AM</span>

---

The subtitle to Jill Lepore's new book The Mansion of Happiness: A History of Life and Death says it all

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Prada Outlet | 08/10/2012 at 08:24 PM</span>