---
title: "Notice"
date: 2009-10-28 10:55:00
permalink: 2009/10/notice-1.html
---
Longtime readers of this blog will be pleased to learn that this month sees its migration into book form. Uncommon Sense: Economic Insights, from Marriage to Terrorism, which collects what we believe are the best, most interesting, and most lasting posts from this blog. The posts selected for the book are representative of the wide range of topics we cover here, and, where appropriate, they've been updated to take account of subsequent events. 
  
The book is available at all good bookstores, on- and offline, as well as directly from the University of Chicago Press: http://www.press.uchicago.edu/presssite/metadata.epl?mode=synopsis&bookkey=1606474.

<span style="color:#999">Posted at 10:55 AM</span>

<!-- more -->

---

### Comments

---

We are a group of volunteers and opening a new scheme in our community. Your site provided us with valuable info to work on. You've done an impressive job and our whole community will be thankful to you.

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: low back pain | 03/26/2011 at 07:49 AM</span>

---

Hello, i think that i saw you visited my weblog thus i came to ??return the favor??.I am attempting to find things to improve my site!I suppose its ok to use some of your ideas!!

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: cureme | 03/26/2011 at 10:18 AM</span>

---

How sweet. You two should take one last fun road trip together before he goes to the great highway in the sky. 

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Garden umbrella | 06/28/2011 at 09:00 PM</span>

---

 build  body  bodybuilding  overtrain  trophy  building  sandow  steroid  general  late  bodybuilder  rest  early  muscle  bodybuilders  protein  time  hyper  physique  ifbb.

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Bodybuilding Steroids for Sale | 04/27/2012 at 05:07 PM</span>