---
title: "Notice"
date: 2011-12-22 08:50:00
permalink: 2011/12/notice-1.html
---
We will resume blogging after New Year's day.

<span style="color:#999">Posted at 08:50 AM</span>

<!-- more -->

---

### Comments

---

Have a safe holiday season!!

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: JamesNT | 12/22/2011 at 02:20 PM</span>

---

Happy Holidays!

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Tax Relief | 12/22/2011 at 04:33 PM</span>

---

bad news! but merry Christmas!   http://www.fagbearing.cc/

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: lee | 12/22/2011 at 11:52 PM</span>

---

Merry Christmas, Professor Becker and Judge Poser. 

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Derek | 12/23/2011 at 12:12 AM</span>

---

http://www.coatinstock.com

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: discount high heel | 12/26/2011 at 02:23 AM</span>

---

Steve Keen has just been featured on INET

http://ineteconomics.org/

Keen makes a very compelling argument that capitalism is inherently unstable and that our problems stem from private debt.

It would be interesting to read whether Posner or Becker have any rebuttal to Keen.

Silence will be taken as agreement with Keen

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: An Observer | 12/26/2011 at 06:59 AM</span>

---

Observer Good input:

And so many others who did not see the Ponzi scheme running out of rubes! 

Aah... yes:  "It is true that one person's debt is another person's asset, but it is equally true that banks create money when they lend. This kind of endogenous expansion of debt, Keen says, drives economic activity, and most economists are completely oblivious to it."

....... Haha and most egregiously when unregulated non-banks "lend" at 30 times assets on junk bonds FRAUDULENTLY labelled and pawned off at Triple A.  Yep, that'll do it every time.  

" Debt that the financial sector dishonorably extended should not be honored, he says."

........ hmmm like illicit gambling debts or drug profits not being enforceable debts. Yep, I'm in.

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Jack | 12/26/2011 at 10:15 PM</span>

---

I had got a desire to start my own business, but I didn't have enough amount of cash to do that. Thank God my close dude advised to use the personal loans. Thence I used the credit loan and realized my dream. 

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Miles34Latasha | 12/27/2011 at 02:09 AM</span>

---

Thank you for such an informative website and post on the EU debt crisis.  This is particularly the case when there seems to be constant and volatile opposition in these weaker EU nations to austerity measures.

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Discount NBA Basketball Shoes | 12/27/2011 at 06:41 PM</span>

---

Happy Holidays!

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: LV Scarves | 12/27/2011 at 06:44 PM</span>

---

Have a safe holiday season!!

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Paul Smith London | 12/27/2011 at 06:47 PM</span>

---

Merry Christmas, Professor Becker and Judge Poser. 

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Nike Running Shoes | 12/27/2011 at 06:50 PM</span>

---

.......... and Happy New Year!!

Can we resolve to at least imprison a token dozen or so Wall Street thieve for 012? 

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Jack | 01/01/2012 at 10:17 PM</span>

---

Debt that the financial sector dishonorably extended should not be honored, he says.

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: caps new era | 01/02/2012 at 08:41 PM</span>

---

Can we resolve to at least imprison a token dozen or so Wall Street thieve for 012? 

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: armani watches | 01/02/2012 at 09:53 PM</span>

---

Happy New Years guys, looks like the first blow against wall street has come. lets imprison them all!  From Judge Eileen Bransten: "ORDERED that MBIA Insurance Corporation’s motion for partial summary judgment is granted to the extent that MBIA Insurance Corporation (“MBIA”) must establish for its claim of fraud that misrepresentations by the defendant(s) induced MBIA to issue insurance policies on terms to which it otherwise would not have agreed and that MBIA is not required to establish a direct causal link between defendant(s) misrepresentations and MBIA’s claims payments made pursuant to the insurance policies at issue; and it is further ordered that MBIA's motion for partial summary judgment is granted to the extent that MBIA must establish for its claim for breach of the Insurance Agreement against Countrywide Home Loans that CHL's breach of warranties in the issued insurance policies' transaction documents increased the risk profile of the issued insurance policies and MBIA is not required to establish a direct causal connection between proven warranty breaches by CHL and MBIA's claims payments made pursuant to the insurance policies at issue, and it is further Ordered that MBIA's motion for partial summary judgment is granted to the extent that MBIA may seek rescissory damages upon proving all elements of its claims for fraud and breach of representation and/or warranty." In short, this is core catalyst that Manal Mehta expected and which BTIG envisioned to justify its $22.50 price target.

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: certified payment processing | 01/03/2012 at 03:44 PM</span>

---

I'm happy I found this article,its great!

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: ferf | 01/03/2012 at 06:50 PM</span>

---

...... the recent New Year?

How about ARE WE IMPRISONING TOO FEW WALL STREET THIEVES and setting POOR example?

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Jack | 01/08/2012 at 10:32 PM</span>

---

will further divide the vote,You can reach the safety of Cairhiens walls long before you could return to Shienar,

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Dr Dre Beats Outlet | 01/09/2012 at 12:19 AM</span>

---

Office 2010 Reminders don’t always work as expected because the Outlook 2010 visual cues that you use for distinguishing them are not always Microsoft Office 2010 professional conclusive, especially when the number of Microsoft Office 2010 these color-coded messages is huge. A better solution is to add a description alongside the message which will pop-up the moment you open the Microsoft Office message. Now Microsoft outlook 2010 adding attachments Office 2010 professional to your e-mail is much easier. Forget what you used to do earlier to attach a mail, like opening a new message, opening the Microsoft outlook paperclip icon, and then using the folder window to finally select the file. 

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Office 2010 | 01/10/2012 at 02:30 AM</span>

---

That is magnificent, waiting desperately. 

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Term Paper  | 01/12/2012 at 06:27 AM</span>

---

Looking forward for new posts.

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: frauen | 01/12/2012 at 08:24 AM</span>

---

Happy Holidays! Thank you for such informative website.

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: ragazze russe | 01/12/2012 at 08:27 AM</span>

---

mean I just read through the entire article of yours and it was quite good but since I'm more of a visual learner,I found that to be more helpful.


<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Onitsuka Tiger | 01/13/2012 at 01:28 AM</span>

---

Merci beaucoup pour votre article.

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: femmes russes | 01/13/2012 at 10:49 AM</span>