---
title: "Notice"
date: 2011-10-28 15:57:00
permalink: 2011/10/notice-2.html
---
Unfortunately, we are again unable to blog this week. We are optimistic about being able to resume next Sunday (Nov. 6).

<span style="color:#999">Posted at 03:57 PM</span>

<!-- more -->

---

### Comments

---

Don't worry!
There are more important things in life.

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Andreas Moser | 10/28/2011 at 04:00 PM</span>

---

Not sure what's going on, but whatever is happening you guys be careful and be safe!!

JamesNT

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: JamesNT | 10/29/2011 at 10:14 AM</span>

---

Looking forward to next week!

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Andres | 10/30/2011 at 06:00 AM</span>

---

This hiatus has revealed that I may have a very serious and unhealthy addiction to your blog.

Cheers, gentlemen.  Looking forward to your return.

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: GG | 10/30/2011 at 09:23 AM</span>

---

Looking forward to a commentary on Occupy Wall Street

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: John | 10/31/2011 at 09:13 AM</span>

---

This would be unlikely if the tax breaks were new rather than for the most part merely continuations of the Bush tax cuts of a decade ago
www.ankaraotokiarlamasirketleri.com

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: ismail | 10/31/2011 at 01:47 PM</span>

---

Highly grateful to this blog! I am optimistic about next week too!

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: WT | 11/01/2011 at 06:57 AM</span>

---

We all miss one here and there! I don't think your readers will mind.

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Matt | 11/01/2011 at 06:19 PM</span>

---

Very happy to see your article, I very much to like and agree with your point of view.

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: nhl jerseys | 11/02/2011 at 09:59 PM</span>

---

Their last three posts were perhaps their most insightful in months. Keep up the good work!

Ok, that was perhaps unkind (I just disagree with them half the time). I hope that they and their families are in good health, and must acknowledge that it is gracious of them to remind their readers that they haven't forgotten them.

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: MrTurtle | 11/03/2011 at 12:47 AM</span>

---

It seems a tough time to hew to the "Chicago school" theory of "hands off".  Or for monentary theory? We're awash in capital with nearly zero rates of real interest, the Fed considering buying mortgages to lower the sub 5% rates available....... and still we're on a downward spiral except for corporate profits.  

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Jack | 11/03/2011 at 07:55 PM</span>

---

Godspeed, Your Honor.

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Chuck Matthews, SPHR | 11/03/2011 at 09:06 PM</span>

---

This dress was perfect for my wedding.

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: landybridal | 11/03/2011 at 10:14 PM</span>

---

Very nice better in future I hoop.
Thanks.

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: online fashion | 11/04/2011 at 03:49 AM</span>

---

We miss you

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: David | 11/04/2011 at 05:56 AM</span>

---

I am highly appreciative of this blog. Looking forward to next week. 

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Anand Manikutty | 11/04/2011 at 01:42 PM</span>

---

looking forward to reading more from you. you are a great writer! where are you based?

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: algae oil omega 3 | 11/07/2011 at 09:45 AM</span>

---

Sunday we got up to a down-pour, and headed to the early service at our church. Our church has just completed a huge add on that has more than doubled the size of the church and it was the first Sunday in the new sanctuary. It was a beautiful service, and it was packed! After church we headed home to change since it was much cooler than expected, then we headed out to my parents and it rained the entire drive, thankfully nothing severe although we were a little late. We had a delicious lunch and then the kids had egg hunt #2. My mom has a huge basket of fake apples in her living room, and David always plays with them, instead of putting eggs in his basket, he loaded it up with apples.

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: True Religion outlet | 11/09/2011 at 01:35 AM</span>

---

Of course, if no money is very free. However, in order to ensure free, need money, not much. Lies which have to be their own money.  

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: sunglasses hut store | 11/18/2011 at 03:02 AM</span>

---

I really appreciated the read and shall be dropping by from time to time now.


<span style="color:#999">Posted by: barbour jacket quilted | 11/24/2011 at 06:13 PM</span>

---

Having higher numbers of occupants per existing structure doesn't bode well for selling off the homes having fallen or about to fall into the laps of bankers.All of the sci-fi stories pointed to a shorter work week, more leisure time and industries developing around increased leisure time coupled with the income to enjoy it. We have nothing like that in place or even in mind. Instead those desperate for any kind of job are to work longer hours for less pay and be appreciative for their opportunity. 

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Cheap Moncler Sale | 11/27/2011 at 11:01 PM</span>

---

All of the sci-fi stories pointed to a shorter work week, more leisure time and industries developing around increased leisure time coupled with the income to enjoy it. 

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Cheap Air Max | 11/28/2011 at 01:29 AM</span>

---

We have nothing like that in place or even in mind. Instead those desperate for any kind of job are to work longer hours for less pay and be appreciative for their opportunity. 

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Air Force One | 11/28/2011 at 01:37 AM</span>

---

The bitter truth is that the employment prospects for a recent college grad are far more grim, especially full-time employment in their field of study. 

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Christian Louboutin UK | 11/28/2011 at 01:39 AM</span>

---

The Occupy Movement and everyone else worried about earnings inequality should be emphasizing the need to find ways to encourage more high school dropouts and high school graduates to get the required background and study habits so that they can, and want to, continue on for a college education.

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Air Max 2011 | 11/28/2011 at 01:40 AM</span>