---
title: "Notice"
date: 2011-10-01 21:57:00
permalink: 2011/10/notice.html
---
We are not able to blog this week. We will resume next Sunday.

<span style="color:#999">Posted at 09:57 PM</span>

<!-- more -->

---

### Comments

---

Judge Posner,

Thanks for the recent opinion explaining contract and non-contractual indemnification, including the interplay between indemnification and subrogation.  I work as an attorney in the GC's Office for a large organization that has a federal side and a private side.  Indemnification or Insurance law in general is a big deal for us.  I'm going to share your insights at our next attorney's meeting.  

You and Judge Easterbrook are the only judges that offer practical guidance and real-world examples to attorneys in your opinions (and during oral arguments).  I also love you when you discuss the law and present hypotheticals during oral argument.  

On occasion we deal with FOIA requests.  You recently sat in on the panel that heard the Chicago Tribune v. Univ of Illinois case. I hope you write that opinion and explain the contours between federal FOIA, privacy and compliance with laws such as FERPA (and regulations from other federal agencies).  

Thanks.  

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Alvin | 10/02/2011 at 09:52 PM</span>

---

please read bad samaritans and 23 things they don't tell you about capitalism by ha-joon chang who teaches in the faculty of economics at the university of cambridge. also read thinking about capitalism(the great courses, by the teaching company) by professor jerry z. muller. please expound more on "the position one occupies in the distribution of income and health is largely a matter of luck, the luck of the genes, the social and economic", etc. thank you. 

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: ronnie ware | 10/03/2011 at 01:33 PM</span>

---

Please please please write something on the al-Awlaki killing.

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: GG | 10/04/2011 at 02:32 PM</span>

---

Gentlemen,

Thanks for all you do. I brag about your blog and bring others because of the value. 

 

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Chuck Matthews, SPHR | 10/04/2011 at 07:19 PM</span>

---

I'm looking forward to seeing your updates.

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: hair extensions for cheap | 10/06/2011 at 12:56 PM</span>

---

Enjoy your well-deserved break!

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Quellitall | 10/07/2011 at 01:15 AM</span>

---

Do not be just a change of government that fix youth unemployment in Spain, being the long continued, sto energy credits,rift platinum:http://www.playerassist.com/rift/ effort of everyone

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Susan Fan | 10/07/2011 at 09:30 PM</span>

---

Very much looking forward to your blog updates, now a week all in the past :)

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: gadgettown | 10/09/2011 at 09:21 PM</span>

---

really appreciate YOU — thanks a lot!

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: mac makeup | 10/11/2011 at 09:37 PM</span>

---

It is nice to know this. Thanks for the time and effort. It is well appreciated. More to come.

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: chi flat iron  | 10/11/2011 at 09:40 PM</span>

---

This seems a topical article for consideration:

Something’s Happening Here 

By THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN 
When you see spontaneous social protests erupting from Tunisia to Tel Aviv to Wall Street it’s clear that something is happening globally that needs defining. There are two unified theories out there that intrigue me. One says this is the start of “The Great Disruption.” The other says that this is all part of “The Big Shift.” You decide. 

Paul Gilding, the Australian environmentalist and author of the book “The Great Disruption,” argues that these demonstrations are a sign that the current growth-obsessed capitalist system is reaching its financial and ecological limits. “I look at the world as an integrated system, so I don’t see these protests, or the debt crisis, or inequality, or the economy, or the climate going weird, in isolation — I see our system in the painful process of breaking down,” which is what he means by the Great Disruption, said Gilding. “Our system of economic growth, of ineffective democracy, of overloading planet earth — our system — is eating itself alive. Occupy Wall Street is like the kid in the fairy story saying what everyone knows but is afraid to say: the emperor has no clothes. The system is broken. Think about the promise of global market capitalism. If we let the system work, if we let the rich get richer, if we let corporations focus on profit, if we let pollution go unpriced and unchecked, then we will all be better off. It may not be equally distributed, but the poor will get less poor, those who work hard will get jobs, those who study hard will get better jobs and we’ll have enough wealth to fix the environment. 

“What we now have — most extremely in the U.S. but pretty much everywhere — is the mother of all broken promises,” Gilding adds. “Yes, the rich are getting richer and the corporations are making profits — with their executives richly rewarded. But, meanwhile, the people are getting worse off — drowning in housing debt and/or tuition debt — many who worked hard are unemployed; many who studied hard are unable to get good work; the environment is getting more and more damaged; and people are realizing their kids will be even worse off than they are. This particular round of protests may build or may not, but what will not go away is the broad coalition of those to whom the system lied and who have now woken up. It’s not just the environmentalists, or the poor, or the unemployed. It’s most people, including the highly educated middle class, who are feeling the results of a system that saw all the growth of the last three decades go to the top 1 percent.” 

Not so fast, says John Hagel III, who is the co-chairman of the Center for the Edge at Deloitte, along with John Seely Brown. In their recent book, “The Power of Pull,” they suggest that we’re in the early stages of a “Big Shift,” precipitated by the merging of globalization and the Information Technology Revolution. In the early stages, we experience this Big Shift as mounting pressure, deteriorating performance and growing stress because we continue to operate with institutions and practices that are increasingly dysfunctional — so the eruption of protest movements is no surprise. 

Yet, the Big Shift also unleashes a huge global flow of ideas, innovations, new collaborative possibilities and new market opportunities. This flow is constantly getting richer and faster. Today, they argue, tapping the global flow becomes the key to productivity, growth and prosperity. But to tap this flow effectively, every country, company and individual needs to be constantly growing their talents. 

“We are living in a world where flow will prevail and topple any obstacles in its way,” says Hagel. “As flow gains momentum, it undermines the precious knowledge stocks that in the past gave us security and wealth. It calls on us to learn faster by working together and to pull out of ourselves more of our true potential, both individually and collectively. It excites us with the possibilities that can only be realized by participating in a broader range of flows. That is the essence of the Big Shift.” 

Yes, corporations now have access to more cheap software, robots, automation, labor and genius than ever. So holding a job takes more talent. But the flip side is that individuals — individuals — anywhere can now access the flow to take online courses at Stanford from a village in Africa, to start a new company with customers everywhere or to collaborate with people anywhere. We have more big problems than ever and more problem-solvers than ever. 

So there you have it: Two master narratives — one threat-based, one opportunity-based, but both involving seismic changes. Gilding is actually an optimist at heart. He believes that while the Great Disruption is inevitable, humanity is best in a crisis, and, once it all hits, we will rise to the occasion and produce transformational economic and social change (using tools of the Big Shift). Hagel is also an optimist. He knows the Great Disruption may be barreling down on us, but he believes that the Big Shift has also created a world where more people than ever have the tools, talents and potential to head it off. My heart is with Hagel, but my head says that you ignore Gilding at your peril. 

You decide. 

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Jack | 10/11/2011 at 10:55 PM</span>

---

I'm looking forward to seeing your updates. 

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: clip on extensions | 10/12/2011 at 09:29 AM</span>

---

One hopes Becker and Posner resume blogging soon.  Maybe some views on the bizarre "Occupy Wall Street" movement?

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: TANSTAAFL | 10/12/2011 at 09:06 PM</span>

---

Tans, if you need help understand the frustration over our nation, and many others, having been greatly damaged by the WS thieves I may be of more help than they who appear to be having a tough time focusing their  well justified wrath.

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Jack | 10/13/2011 at 12:33 AM</span>

---

Jack, thanks but no thanks.  In America it is possible to outgrow envy for others.

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: TANSTAAFL | 10/13/2011 at 06:01 PM</span>

---

Tans? "Envy?"  Aren't we talking policy here and how to rescue what remains of our once strong economy replete with, (higher tax rates) and a balanced budget?  Even a surplus worrisome to Gspn who wondered how we'd possibly price our T-bonds were there none out there to go by?  

I guessing you've not looked over the graphs depicting what happened to the "rising tide" once expected to lift ALL of the boats; perhaps this would be a good time to do so?
http://lanekenworthy.net/2008/03/09/the-best-inequality-graph/


<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Jack | 10/14/2011 at 12:06 AM</span>

---

The past two weeks have been filled with issues regarding the data feed from Microsoft. Achievements are being listed on Xbox.com sometimes one or two full days after they were initially unlocked. The issues are causing daily blogs to sometimes register an increase in gamerscore, but no information on what game this increase came from. Fshguy is hard at work on re-writing our system to compensate for this loss of data, but given the wide spread nature of the problem since it is stemming directly from Xbox.com and the Xbox LIVE data feed, a solution will take some time.




<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Christian louboutin shoes | 10/17/2011 at 02:48 AM</span>

---

Jack, Yep. It's the dichotomy that exists. 

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: nike free run 2 | 10/18/2011 at 02:59 AM</span>

---

I enjoyed your conversation. Where can I follow it? Thank you so much for sharing some suggestions and ideas.

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: sell timeshare | 10/23/2011 at 07:50 AM</span>

---

I guess marketing is more important for some companies, they want to sell as much to have profit and they don't care about anything else. How many products write on the label what is for real, not many, not even the ingredients, they try to mask all the preservatives and chemicals and some skip to add them.

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: custom essay | 10/27/2011 at 10:53 AM</span>

---

It is an extremely flattering dress! 

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: landybridal | 11/01/2011 at 11:16 PM</span>

---

This dress was perfect for my wedding.

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: landybridal | 11/03/2011 at 10:18 PM</span>

---

Great Post..

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Fred | 11/14/2011 at 05:50 PM</span>

---

lol... lots of comments for nothing

<span style="color:#999">Posted by: Back Taxes | 11/15/2011 at 11:43 PM</span>

---

So nice your post, I certainly love this website, come on.


<span style="color:#999">Posted by: barbour jacket quilted | 11/24/2011 at 06:24 PM</span>